---
title: 'Blog Post number 1'
date: 2023-05-23
permalink: /posts/2023/05/blog-post-1/
toc: false
categories:
  - news-post
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
header:
  teaser: /images/alexweb2.jpg
---

I would like to take this opportunity to update you all about the progress I have made during the last semester together with my outstanding collaborators.  Here is a summary of the recent works organized by topic. Links to my personal website are provided. So if interested, there you will find specific details about each work.

# Table of Contents

- [Unsourced random access](#umac)
- [URLLC communications](#urllc)
- [MSE estimation bounds in model mismatch](#mse)
- [Interference rejection via deep learning](#intmit)

<hr>

## Unsourced random access {#umac}

<hr>
 A. Fengler, A. Lancho, K. Narayanan, Y. Polyanskiy, “On the Advantages of Asynchrony in the Unsourced MAC,” to be presented at <em>IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory</em> (ISIT), Taipei, Taiwan, Jun. 2023. <!-- [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10001513">IEEExplore</a>] -->[<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06985">arXiv</a>]
<hr>

In this work, we demonstrate how a lack of synchronization can be advantageous in the problem of random access. Specifically, we consider a multiple-access problem over a frame-asynchronous 2-user binary-input adder channel in the unsourced setup and show that an arbitrary small (even single-bit) shift between the user's frames enables (random) linear codes to attain full capacity (0.75 bit/user). Previous works showed that under perfect synchronization, the per-user rates achievable with linear codes over the 2-UBAC are limited by 0.5 bit per channel use.

<hr>
 K.-H. Ngo, A. Lancho, G. Durisi, and A. Graell i Amat, “Unsourced multiple access with random user activity,” <em>IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory</em>, Feb. 2023. 
 [<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.06365">arXiv</a>] [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10052701">IEEExplore</a>] [<a href="https://github.com/khachoang1412/UMA_random_user_activity">Matlab code</a>]
<hr>

In this work, we extend Polyanskiy's random-coding bound for the Gaussian unsourced multiple access channel (UMAC) to the setting where the number of active users is random and unknown. 

<hr>
 A. Lancho, A. Fengler and Y. Polyanskiy, “Finite-blocklength results for the A-channel: applications to unsourced random access and group testing,” in Proc. <em>58th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing,</em> Champaign, IL, Sep. 27-30, 2022.
 [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9929318">IEEExplore</a>] 
 [<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.01951">arXiv</a>]
<hr>

Several unsourced multiple access channel (UMAC) schemes divide the available channel uses into sections in order to apply coding over a relatively small amount of channel uses, with the goal of keeping a reasonable decoding complexity. The codes employed per section are usually referred to as inner codes. Even though we can recover lists of transmitted sub-codewords per section, we still need properly connect the different estimated sub-codewords in all sections to estimate the list of transmitted codewords. This is usually performed via outer codes. The A-channel is a channel model that allows the establishment of performance benchmarks for outer codes in unsourced random access schemes. In this work, we make this connection and present finite-blocklength bounds on the A-channel. We also show that the A-channel finds applications in group testing, and hence insights from group-testing schemes can be used to improve available outer codes used for UMAC. 

## URLLC communications {#urllc}

<hr>
A. Lancho, G. Durisi, and L. Sanguinetti, “Cell-free Massive MIMO for URLLC: A finite-blocklength analysis,” <em>IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.</em>, Apr. 2023.
 [<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.00856">arXiv</a>]
 [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10101779">IEEExplore</a>]
 [<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uxk3-8YAK9Q">YouTube</a>]
<hr>

 In this work, we present a general framework for the characterization of the packet error probability achievable in cell-free Massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) architectures deployed to support ultra-reliable low-latency (URLLC) traffic. This work is an extension of the results of our previous work [Ostman et al] for cellular Massive MIMO. 
Some important conclusions in the design of cell-free architectures for URLLC are: i) minimum mean square error (MMSE) spatial processing must be used to achieve the URLLC targets; ii) for a given total number of antennas per coverage area, centralized cell-free solutions involving single-antenna access points (APs) offer the best performance in the uplink, thereby highlighting the importance of reducing the average distance between APs and UEs in the URLLC regime; iii) this observation applies also to the downlink, provided that the APs transmit precoded pilots to allow the UEs to estimate accurately the precoded channel. 

<hr>
 A.O. Kislal, A. Lancho, G. Durisi, and E. Strom, “Efficient evaluation of the error probability for pilot-assisted URLLC with Massive MIMO,” <em>IEEE Journal Sel. Areas Commun.</em>, May 2023. 
 [<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.02385">arXiv</a>]
 [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10138403">IEEExplore</a>]
<hr>

In this work, we extend the framework derived in [Ostman et al] in a different way. Instead of considering a cell-free setup, we stay in the cellular case and analyze the memoryless block-fading channel, as opposed to the previous works that are particular to quasistatic fading channels. In particular, the saddlepoint approximation here is performed with respect to the number of fading blocks (a.k.a. diversity branches) spanned by each codeword, instead of the number of channel uses per block. This approach turns out to be more numerically efficient, and our numerical experiments show that, when two or more diversity branches are available, the saddlepoint approximation with respect to the number of fading blocks achieves the same precision as the one in terms of channel uses, while requiring about two orders of magnitude fewer Monte-Carlo samples.

## A Novel MSE bound for Estimation in Model Mismatch {#mse}

<hr>
 A. Weiss, A. Lancho, Y. Bu, G.W. Wornell, “A Bilateral Bound on the Mean-Square Error for Estimation in Model Mismatch,” to be presented at <em>IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory</em> (ISIT), Taipei, Taiwan, Jun. 2023.
 <!-- [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10001513">IEEExplore</a>] -->
 [<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08207">arXiv</a>]
<hr>

In this work, we present a bilateral bound on the mean-square error under a general model mismatch. The bound, which is specific to a given (but any) estimator, is applicable in the Bayesian and nonBayesian frameworks to both \*biased\* and unbiased estimators. Unlike other classical MSE bounds that refer to a model, our bound takes into account the specific estimator of intertest, and is therefore applicable as a tool for characterizing its MSE. In the paper, we present a few of applications of the bound. Also, as an example where the bound can be used to characterize a deep neural network performance is presented in [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10094981">Weiss et al. 2023</a>] where my colleague Amir Weiss and his coauthors used it in the context of underwater acoustic localization. 

## Interference rejection via deep learning {#intmit}

The proliferation of wireless devices is leading to an increasingly crowded radio spectrum and it is expected that different wireless communication systems will coexist in the same frequency bands, thereby generating unintentional interferences among them. Nowadays, most wireless communication systems simply use a matched filter at the receiver to mitigate the incoming interference, which is only optimal (in the SNR sense) when such interference is white Gaussian. In a scenario where nonGaussian signals will generate interference, to maintain high reliabilities, more advanced techniques will be required. 

One possible and quite realistic approach is to assume that only a dataset of the underlying communication signals is available and design data-driven interference rejection solutions. The datasets can be obtained, for example, through direct/background recordings, or using high-fidelity simulators. Motivated by its success in the image and audio domains, deep learning arises as a very promising solution. 

In the following works, we explore how much gain deep learning architectures can achieve compared to traditional methods such as matched filtering:

<hr>
 G.C.F. Lee, A. Weiss, A. Lancho, Y. Polyanskiy, G.W. Wornell, “On neural architectures for deep learning-based source separation of co-channel OFDM signals,” in Proc. <em>IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process.</em> (ICASSP), Rhodes Island, Greece, Jun. 2023.
 <!-- [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10001513">IEEExplore</a>] -->
 [<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.06438">arXiv</a>]
 [<a href="https://github.com/RFChallenge/SCSS_OFDMArchitecture">Python code</a>]
<hr>

We study the single-channel source separation problem involving orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) signals and assess -- and question -- the efficacy of using audio-oriented neural architectures in separating signals based on features pertinent to communication waveforms, and propose key modifications to state-of-the-art architectures to succeed. 

<hr>
 A. Lancho, A. Weiss, G.C.F. Lee, J. Tang, Y. Bu, Y. Polyanskiy and G.W. Wornell, “Data-driven blind synchronization and interference rejection for digital communication signals,” in Proc. <em>IEEE Global Communications Conference</em> (GLOBECOM), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Dec. 2022.
 [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10001513">IEEExplore</a>]
 [<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.04871">arXiv</a>]
 [<a href="https://github.com/RFChallenge/SCSS_Sync">Python code</a>]
<hr>

In this work, we show that capturing high-resolution temporal structures (nonstationarities), which enables accurate synchronization to both the SOI and the interference, leads to substantial performance gains. 

<hr>
 G.C.F. Lee, A. Weiss, A. Lancho, J. Tang, Y. Bu, Y. Polyanskiy and G.W. Wornell, “Exploiting temporal structures of cyclostationary signals for data-driven single-channel source separation,” in Proc. <em>IEEE International Workshop for Machine Learning and Signal Processing</em> (MLSP), Xi'an, China, Aug. 2022. 
 [<a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9943311">IEEExplore</a>]
 [<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.10325">arXiv</a>] 
 [<a href="https://github.com/RFChallenge/SCSS_CSGaussian">Python code</a>]
 (<b>Best student paper award</b>)
<hr>

In this work, we focus on cyclostationary Gaussian signals, which model the temporal structure of many communication signals. In particular, we establish a lower bound on the attainable mean squared error (MSE) for any separation (interference rejection) method, model-based or data-driven. As a computationally attractive alternative, we propose a deep learning approach using a U-Net architecture, which, after some domain-informed architectural choices, is competitive with the minimum MSE estimator. 